[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory today i'm going to be
answering your questions all about
self-care
now self-care i think is something that
people come out from a lot of different
angles some angles make sense others
don't we're going to dive into the
nitty-gritty of exactly how to use
self-care in your life as a way to move
you forward towards your goals to not
become self-indulgent to
not be inefficient with it but really to
leverage it for what it's meant to do
which is make your life enjoyable and
effective and so that will be exactly
what we tackled today all right here's
the first question what kinds of things
can you do to train your thoughts so
they see self-care as something
instrumental to my success i'm wondering
how i can reframe or condition myself to
see the gym and self-care as something
that will help me do more in the long
run and short term all right so this is
a great way to think about the question
when you're thinking about anything in
your life
the frame of reference by which you
approach it will determine exactly what
you see it's a great quote that says it
doesn't matter what you look at it
matters what you see and once you
understand that what you believe is
going to determine what you see you
realize that all of this starts with
belief and that's why i say that belief
determines behavior and behavior is all
that matters so getting the belief right
getting the frame of reference right is
going to be the thing that will get your
actions in alignment
so the key is to really understand what
the human condition is so you're having
a biological experience getting people
to understand that is my complete
obsession so belief number one i'm going
to put in place i'm having a biological
experience now why does that matter
because what i'm trying to do is affect
my behavior to get me to do the things
will be quote unquote better for me but
what is quote unquote better for me is
based on the realities of my biology so
the reason that i work out the reason
that i prioritize sleep the reason that
i
meditate
all of those things are because i know
that that's what you need to do in order
to cognitively optimize so if you want
to be effective with your day you need
to do the things that set you up to be
able to think clearly and quickly so to
do that we're going to need to get our
sleep
it's just the studies show right if you
deprive somebody of sleep they look like
a pre-diabetic person in terms of how
they respond to blood sugar
it's just as bad being sleepy is just as
bad as being drunk in terms of a driving
test they're just all kinds of studies
that come out that show what you already
intuitively know which is not getting
enough sleep
sucks and the reason it sucks is because
it makes you underperform it makes it
harder to think clearly it makes it
harder to enjoy your life you have less
energy and that's even at a cellular
level so when you think about sleep and
the impacts that it has on your
abilities body to generate atp which is
the energy created by the mitochondria
in your cells which is exactly what lets
you move forward so recognizing that i'm
having a biological experience is then
going to compel me to do the things that
i need to do in order to get the results
that i want and so in this case it's the
frame of reference of self-care as a
biological optimization mechanism and
that for me was incredibly freeing and i
had heard the quote before
those that don't have time to meditate
are the people who most need meditation
and that is absolutely fundamentally
true the same is true of self-care
the people that don't have time for
self-care are the people that most need
the self-care so you need to get to that
point where you recognize the truth of
the human condition which is that if you
don't take care of your biology your
biology won't be able to take care of
you and so self-care really is simply
the practice
of optimizing your life
at a cellular and psychological level
and so once we know that
then
it becomes easy to take the actions that
we need to take because ultimately
that's what life is all about being
fulfilled and joyful you're not going to
be joyful all the time this is why we
talk about fulfillment first but
optimizing around fulfillment and joy
that's the punch line there isn't
anything else so if getting myself
prepared for that requires self-care
which it does
then that's how i reframe this to get
myself in the mode of self-care
how do you know when it's time to refuel
and choose self-care instead of
continuing to grind
physiological self-awareness is critical
i hear a lot of talk about people
developing psychological self-awareness
so understanding
what you're good at what you want to do
all of those things incredibly useful
but understanding how to read your body
may be even more important than that so
lisa feldman barrett's book how emotions
are made
detail the way that emotions are far
more of a bottom up phenomenon meaning
they come from your body it isn't you
thinking about something and then
creating the emotion down that does
happen and of course you can spiral
yourself out of control simply by
thinking but usually what begins this
thinking process is a sense of unease
right anxiety is a bodily feeling
oftentimes disconnected from what you're
thinking
so figuring out oh why do i have the
sense being able to process it
consciously we can pull it up into our
conscious mind and think through it with
words and logic but oftentimes it's
starting with that like oh man i don't
feel good about this and i don't know
why so this is the fascinating thing
about drugs is drugs can either
eliminate or change the bodily sensation
which then changes the story that you're
telling yourself about the sensation now
this isn't an advertisement for drugs
it's to get you to understand that it
can be risky to sever
the sense of body from what you're
telling yourself about it so you want
your body to give you this description
of what is going on but then as you take
conscious control of that to develop
that self-awareness around
physiologically what's happening you
need to understand why you're feeling
the way that you feel and so developing
that to get a sense of whether
this is a time to keep pushing through
or whether this is like one of those
moments where you actually really do
need to step back it's the difference
between sore muscles from you know a
nice hard workout and a torn muscle or
damaged joint from an injury and the
same thing is true when you're thinking
about how hard to work how hard to push
yourself you need to figure out this
fatigue that i'm feeling this unease
this anxiety this stress is this a
natural part of pushing through the
difficulties of this project or is
something else going on this is now
really starting to cave in on me and
what i need to do now is take a step
back
meditate
journal
hug my significant other pet my dog
cuddle my kids whatever the case may be
go for a run
but doing something that
slows you down
lets you take a deep breath
and the only way to figure that out
is to be able to interpret
the feelings that your body is giving
you
into conscious thought okay and getting
good at that loop is very very important
and it takes practice it takes
understanding what the body is
communicating why it's communicating it
what impacts it like what you eat and
drink has a huge impact on what your gut
is telling you and then your brain tries
to make sense of it and it doesn't
always go oh i'm feeling anxious because
in my case i was drinking a zero calorie
monster which much to my dismay because
i absolutely love them
make me feel anxious and so
getting an understanding of that
seeing that pattern was actually quite
transformational because i stopped
drinking them and my anxiety levels
plummeted
by like 70 it's pretty crazy didn't take
me to zero but it made it a phenomenon
that was easily manageable through
meditation
so this is where you have to develop
that awareness that pattern recognition
and be able to say oh i feel this way
because of xyz thing happening at work
or with my spouse or with food that i'm
consuming so be very thoughtful about
that and that will then help you
determine whether it's we need self-care
or we just need to push through
all right
when do you consider lack of self-care
ultimately a lack of self-love and not
just an issue with time management or
prioritizing
okay so some of this is going to again
come back to the ability to be
self-aware about the way that you feel
and the thoughts that you're having so
as you're
thinking about pushing through
you need to ask yourself
where is this energy coming from is this
energy coming from i think i'm a loser
and if i don't accomplish this i'll
never matter i'll never mean anything
i'm too stupid whatever and that energy
is a very constrictive energy and this
is an easy way to begin to get that
self-awareness this emotion that i feel
is it tied to a story that i'm telling
myself what is that story that i'm
telling myself and the feeling that i'm
feeling when i tell myself that story
does it feel constrictive am i closing
down or does it feel expansive like i'm
opening up like it's making me feel
lighter now it's
super fascinating that the story that
you tell yourself is going to have one
of those two reactions you are either
going to feel yourself tightening up
constricting down feeling less wanting
to like almost close in on yourself or
it's going to make you feel lighter it's
going to feel like what i'm doing with
my body where i'm you know shoulders
back standing up tall it makes you feel
open and expansive
now as you begin to identify which
stories make you feel which way now you
can really begin to take control of that
story but you also need to look at
what's underlying all of this because
you can't
unfortunately
just tell yourself to love yourself
while it helps a little bit
it's maybe five percent the other 95
percent is actually doing something that
you think is worthy of respect actually
doing something that makes you feel
that you have worth
you you actually have to contribute in a
way that you believe is meaningful and
if you're not contributing in a way to
yourself to others to your family in a
way that you think is meaningful then
you're going to struggle no matter how
much you tell yourself that you love
yourself that you're worthy that you're
good enough as you are it just won't
work because you have these inborn
imperatives implanted deep in the wiring
of your brain that make you want to act
in certain ways and if you don't get in
alignment with that then you can really
get into a dark place and if you're in
that dark place and you're using
pushing yourself as
punishment
and it's really just hey loser come on
you've got to get this done and it's all
tied up in getting across that finish
line impressing other people impressing
your parents impressing your friends
whatever
then we know that we're not coming at
this from the right place
and so that's a moment where we need to
start getting into the self-care
because we
recognize that the whole point of life
is to optimize for fulfillment and joy
and beating ourselves up
thinking ourselves worthless do not move
us towards that goal
and i encourage all of you to have the
belief in your life that you only do and
believe that which moves you towards
your goals now as long as your goal is
exciting and honorable
meaning it elevates not only yourself
but other people as well
then that's a great way to live if you
have the wrong goal and it's based on
that dark energy you can get yourself
into trouble but assuming that you have
this expansive goal that's exciting to
you it helps you and it helps other
people now optimizing for that and doing
things and believing things that move us
towards that goal will become incredibly
useful and going back to that earlier
idea of you've got this goal it's
exciting and honorable we want to do
things and move us towards it and we're
having a biological experience then we
need to do the self-care things that are
going to lead us to that and you know
just to give like a quick package of
what a great self-care bundle looks like
a great self-care bundle would be
getting plenty of sleep
eating a great diet
working out
meditating
journaling
having loving relationships in your life
that you give quality time to
and then meaning and purpose you're
doing something that you believe matters
okay that's a great
cocktail
for
really stepping into fulfillment really
being able to find joy in your life and
then having a reason to repeat that
cycle you know and when you're doing
that stuff when you're getting your
sleep when you have loved ones in your
life when you're exercising i think i
said exercise if i didn't exercise is a
great one to make sure is in the mix
you're taking care of the biology
you're addressing all the things that
are going to give you the right
neurochemical state that you want to be
in right loving relationships caring
about people doing things that matter
meaning and purpose
all of that stuff is going to have a
tremendous impact on your mental state
so
that is
the way to think about
having that bundle of self-love
self-care
thinking about
why i'm doing the things that i'm doing
making sure that i'm moving towards my
goal and making sure that i understand
what's pushing me to do the things that
i'm doing and you want to make sure that
it's not punishment you want to make
sure that it's expansive you want to
make sure that it's sustainable you want
to make sure that it's optimized for
fulfillment and joy
where should a person start with
improving their self-care if they have
low self-esteem do you think leveraging
one
can directly improve the other okay
you've really got two issues here
but they are inextricably linked
you've got biology you've got psychology
the self-care is largely going to be a
question of biology getting the sleep
eating a diet that
at a cellular level is serving us at a
microbiome level is helping us at a
cognition level is helping us right
setting us up for success
meditating making sure that we get that
background stress and anxiety radiation
down to zero
huge in terms of getting you into a calm
and creative space so that you can think
through difficult problems
all of these things are
what you're going to
need to do if you want to do well in
your life now
self-esteem
is a whole nother issue self-esteem has
everything to do with what you think
about yourself when you're by yourself
now you have to earn your way to that
and so the key to earning your way to
that is to figure out what is your
value system
what do you value what do you think is
the way that people should be spending
their time and their energies and then
are you doing things in accordance with
that and then there are things that are
baked in that are innate so there are
these innate drivers given to us by
evolution
uh hard work the desire to contribute to
the group meaning and purpose
deep connection with other people that
we love okay these are you have that
imperative there is nothing that you can
do to shake that imperative and so
understanding how it works and
understanding how you need to meet the
needs of that if you want to be
fulfilled and be joyful is critically
important so as you go about teasing out
whether you have a self-care issue a
biological issue a self-esteem issue
something that is
either we're not addressing the
imperatives to contribute which is sort
of the easiest one to go to
or
we've let the self-care get so
out of whack we're not sleeping we're
not doing all of those things that it's
really beginning to
debilitate us
from doing the things that we need to do
in order to build up our self-esteem now
your self-esteem is really built around
the framework of congruence i said i was
going to do it i'm going to do it so
that when you say you're going to do
something you actually do it and then
whether that's a promise you make to
yourself or to somebody else and then
the
fulfillment formula which is to work
really hard to gain a set of skills that
are unique to you and matter to you are
exciting to you and that they serve not
only yourself but other people
and so if you're doing that working
really hard to get exceptional it's
something that matters that the world
cares about and that you love and then
you contribute in a way that elevates
you and other people
that's the game of fulfillment and so if
you're doing that i think you will find
that that will take care of self-esteem
but if you're not doing that if you're
not finding ways to contribute to the
group if you're not progressing in your
life
then you're going to really struggle
with that so
you do the self-care to make sure that
you can actually build the self-esteem
by contributing in that way
and then those two things work
wonderfully together but you have to
recognize that they really are two
separate issues and they both need to be
addressed
all right what tips do you have for
someone who struggles to keep up their
self-care routine when things get
stressful all right this is going back
to that earlier statement the people
that have the least time to do self-care
are the ones that most need it
let's say that again
the people that have the least amount of
time to do self-care are the ones that
most need it
so in your life as things are ratcheting
up as things are getting more difficult
as the stress is piling on this is when
self-care becomes absolutely critical
because as your cognition becomes less
efficient because you're not sleeping
you're not eating right
you're stressed to the gills you're not
able to engage in the loving
relationships in your life all the
things that act at a physiological level
they change your neurochemistry
they change your physiology so the
constriction of your blood vessels right
and this is why blood pressure goes up
when people are stressed
there's a reason
that the state that you're trying to get
into when you meditate is called calm
and creative okay the whole idea is as
you lower that stress and anxiety you
get into a calm and creative space where
you can problem solve and so that's the
goal we want to get into a place where
we can begin problem solving
so that is the critically important
thing here now to do that
we have to have a commitment to
ourselves a bright line
that not only do we do these things
every day whether we think we need them
or not that we are even more likely to
stick to it to do it for longer when
things really get stressful because the
only way that we're going to be able to
accurately deal with the underlying
cause of the stress because we we're not
interested just in symptom mitigation we
want to do that but we don't just want
to mitigate symptoms we want to solve
the problems that are creating the
anxiety in the first place and the way
that we're going to do that is by
self-care
sleeping well
meditating
eating right
exercising okay these are all the things
that we need to do to make sure that our
self-care is on point so that we can
then get out from under the stress
and that's it
bright lines make sure that when
stressful times come that that's when
you lean even more heavily into your
self-care
all right guys self-care is critically
important i hope you guys are doing it
physiological level you're having a
biological experience all of this stuff
optimizes your cognition it's the only
way to get through life without life
sucking so make sure that you spend the
time and the energy to do all of this
stuff alright guys thank you so much for
joining me now go take very good care of
yourselves and until next time my
friends be legendary take care peace